### 3.3.2
***
Describe the languages denoted by the following regular expressions:

a) **a**(**a**|**b**)***a**.

b) ((ε|**a**)**b***)*.

c) (**a**|**b**)***a**(**a**|**b**)(**a**|**b**).

d) **a**\***ba**\***ba**\***ba**\*.

e) (**aa**|**bb**)\*((**ab**|**ba**)(**aa**|**bb**)\*(**ab**|**ba**)(**aa**|**bb**)\*)\*.

### `Answer`
a) String of a's and b's that start and end with a.

b) String of a's and b's.

c) String of a's and b's that the character third from last is a.

d) String of a's and b's containing 3 b's.

e) String of a's and b's containing even number of a's and b's.

### 3.3.3
***
In a string of length *n*, how many of the following are there?

a) Prefixes.

b) Suffixes.

c) Proper prefixes.

d) Substrings.

e) Subsequences.

### `Answer`
a) n + 1

b) n + 1

c) n - 1

d) C(n+1, 2) + 1

e) Σ(i = 0, n) C(n, i)

### 3.3.4
***
Most languages are *case sensitive*, so keywords can be written only one way, and the regular expressions describing their lexemes are very simple. However, some language, like SQL, are *case insensitive* so a keyword can be written either in lowercase or in uppercase, or in any mixture of cases. Thus, the SQL keyword ```SELECT``` can also be written ```select```, ```Select```, or ```sElEcT```, or instance. Show how to write a regular expression for the keyword in a case-insensitive language. Illustrate the idea by writing the expression for "select" in SQL.

### `Answer`
```
select -> [Ss][Ee][Ll][Ee][Cc][Tt]
```

### 3.3.4
***
Write regular definitions for the following languages:

a) All strings of lowercase letters that contain the five vowels in order.

b) All strings of lowercase letters in which the letters are in ascending lexicographic order.

c) Comments, consisting of a string surrounded by /* and */, without an intervening */, unless it is inside double-quotes (").

d) All strings of digits with no repeated digits. *Hint*: Try this problem first with a few digits, such as {0, 1, 2}.

e) All strings of digits with at most one repeated digit.

f) All strings of *a*'s and *b*'s with an even number of *a*'s and an odd number of *b*'s.

g) The set of Chess moves, in the informal notation, such as ```p-k4``` or ```kbp*qn```.

h) All strings of *a*'s and *b*'s that do not contain the substring *abb*.

i) All strings of *a*'s and *b*'s that do not contain the subsequence *abb*.

### `Answer`
a)
```
string -> cons* a (cons|a)* e (cons|e)* i (cons|i)* o (cons|o)* u (cons|u)*
  cons -> [bcdfghjklmnpqrstvwxyz]
```
b)
```
a* b* c* ... z*
```
c)
```
/*([^*"]*|".*"|*+[^/])**/
```
d) For digits containing 0, 1 and 2 only,
```
digits -> 0|A0?|A?0?1(01|A0?1)*A?0?
     A -> 0?2(02)*
```
e) For digits containing 0 and 1 only,
```
0(0?11?0)*0?|1(1?00?1)*1?
```
f)
```
string -> ((aa)*b|(AB*C))(B|(a|bA)B*C)*
     A -> a(aa)*b
     B -> b(aa)*b
     C -> a|b(aa)*ab
```
g)
```
moves  -> pieces*pieces | pieces-(k|q)(r|n|b)[1-8] | 0-0-0 | 0-0
pieces -> (k|q)(r|n|b|ε)p?
```
h)
```
b*(a+b?)*
```
i)
```
b*|b*a+|b*a+ba*
```


### 3.3.6
***
Write character classes for the following sets of characters:

a) The first ten letters (up to "j") in either upper or lower case.

b) The lowercase consonants.

c) The "digits" in a hexadecimal number (choose either upper or lowercase for the "digits" above 9).

d) The characters that can appear at the end of a legitimate English sentence (e.g., exclamation point).

### `Answer`
a) [A-Ja-j]

b) [bcdfghjklmnpqrstvwxyz]

c) [0-9A-F]

d) [.?!]

### 3.3.7
***
Note that these regular expressions give all of the following symbols (*operator characters*) a special meaning:
```
      \ " . ^ $ [ ] * + ? { } | /
```
Their special meaning must be turned off if they are needed to represent themselves in a character string. We can do so by quoting the character within a string of length one or more; e.g., the regular expression "**" matches the string **. We can also get the literal meaning of an operator character by preceding it with a backslash. Thus, the regular expression \*\* also matches the string **. Write a regular expression that matches the string "\\.

### `Answer`
```
\"\\
```

### 3.3.9
***
The regular expression *r*{*m*, *n*} matches from *m* to *n* occurences of the pattern *r*. For example, ```a{1, 5}``` matches a string of one to five *a*'s. Show that for every regular expression containing repitition operators of this form, there is an equivalent regular expression without repitition operators.

### `Answer`
*r*{*m*, *n*} is equivalent to *r*.*m*.*r* | *r*.*m+1*.*r* | ... | *r*.*n*.*r*

### 3.3.10
***
The operator ^ matches the left end of a line, and $ matches the right end of a line. The operator ^ is also used to introduce complemented character classes, but the context always makes it clear which meaning is intended. For example, ```^[^aeiou]*$``` matches any complete line that does not contain a lowercase vowel.

a) How do you tell which meaning of ^ is intended?

b) Can you always replace a regular expression using the ^ and $ operators by an equivalent expression that does not use either of these operators?

### `Answer`
a) If ^ is the first character within a pair of brackets, then it means complemented character classes, and if ^ is the first character outside the pair of brackets, then it means the left end of a line.
